README.adoc, before:

= Sonarqube Operator

== Overview

This repository contains the code to build a Sonarqube Operator for Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform. It will not run on Kubernetes because it uses the `Route` object to provide access to Sonarqube.

The Operator will create a *PostgreSQL* database with persistent storage and a *SonarQube* instance also with persistent storage connected to the PostgreSQL database.

It is implemented on top of the Red Hat https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk[Operator SDK] - in particular the https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/doc/ansible/user-guide.md[Ansible Operator].

== Building the Operator

There is a script `build.sh` which will download the prerequisite Ansible roles from https://github.com/redhat-gpte-devopsautomation/ansible-operator-roles and install the required roles. The script will then build the container image.

Before running the script make sure to update the location of the container image to a repository you have access to. If you decide to build your own also make sure to update deploy/operator.yaml with the updated container image location.

== Installation

=== Common Installation Steps

The installation of the Custom Resource Definition and Cluster Role requires *cluster-admin* privileges. After that regular users with `admin` privileges on their projects (which is automatically granted to the user who creates a project) can provision the SonarQube Operator in their projects and deploy instances of Sonarqube using the sonarqube.gpte.opentlc.com Custom Resource.

Perform the following tasks as *cluster-admin*:

. Deploy the Custom Resource Definition:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/crds/gpte_v1alpha1_sonarqube_crd.yaml
----

. Deploy the `sonarqube-admin-rules` Cluster Role (which will be granted automatically to everyone with `admin` privileges):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/clusterrole_admin.yaml
----

=== Clusterwide Installation

Perform the following tasks as *cluster-admin*:

. Create the Cluster Role for the Operator
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/clusterrole.yaml
----

. Create a project for the operator to run in (different from where the application will be running)
+
[source,sh]
----
oc new-project gpte-operators --display-name="GPTE Operators"
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/service_account.yaml
----

. Grant the *sonarqube-cluster-operator* role to the *sonarqube-operator* service account (if your project is not `gpte-operators` change the project name in the command):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-user sonarqube-cluster-operator system:serviceaccount:gpte-operators:sonarqube-operator
----

. And finally create the SonarQube *Operator*:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/cluster_operator.yaml
----

. Once the Operator pod is running the Operator is ready to start creating SonarQube Servers.

=== Local Installation in a Project

The next steps work either as *cluster-admin* or as a *regular user*.

. Create a new project in which to deploy SonarQube:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc new-project sonarqube --display-name "SonarQube"
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/service_account.yaml
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* role:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/role.yaml
----

. Grant the *sonarqube-operator* role to the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/rolebinding.yaml
----

. And finally create the SonarQube *Operator*:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/operator.yaml
----

. Once the Operator pod is running the Operator is ready to start creating SonarQube instances.

== Deploying a SonarQube instance using the Operator

A SonarQube instance is deployed by creating a Custom Resource based on the sonarqube Custom Resource Definition. There is an example of a SonarQube CR at https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/crds/sonarqube_v1alpha1_sonarqube_cr.yaml.

The SonarQube Operator understands the following settings under it's *spec* setting:

* postgresqlVolumeSize: The size of the Persistent Volume to be created for the PostgreSQL database (e.g. 4Gi)
* sonarqubeVolumeSize: The size of the Persistent Volume to be created for SonarQube (e.g. 4Gi)
* sonarqubeSsl: Weather the created route should be a HTTP (false) or HTTPS (true) route.
* sonarqubeServiceName: Optional. The name of the sonarqube service. The default is "sonarqube-metadata.name" where _metadata.name_ is the name of the CR object (in the example below `sonarqube-server`). When specifying this parameter ensure that the service name does not already exist in the project/namespace.
* sonarqubeRoute: Optional. The fully qualified route of the Sonarqube route to be created. This route must be reachable via ingress controllers.

.Example
[source,texinfo]
----
apiVersion: gpte.opentlc.com/v1alpha1
kind: Sonarqube
metadata:
  name: sonarqube
spec:
  postgresqlVolumeSize: 10Gi
  sonarqubeVolumeSize: 10Gi
  sonarqubeSsl: True
  sonarqubeServiceName: mysonarqube
----

. Write the definition to a file (e.g. sonarqube.yaml) and then create the SonarQube instance:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f ./sonarqube.yaml
----

. The operator will first create the PostgreSQL database, wait until it is up and running and then create the SonarQube pod.
. Validate that both pods (postgresql and sonarqube) are running before proceeding.
. You can validate the existence of your SonarQube instance by querying for sonarqube objects:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc get sonarqube
----

. Get the Route for SonarQube (the PostgreSQL database is not accessible outside of the project):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc get route
----

. Use the hostname returned in your Web Browser to open the SonarQube UI (default User ID is `admin` with password `admin`).

== Deleting a SonarQube instance

Deleting a SonarQube instance and its associated resources is as simple as deleting the sonarqube object. If you created a SonarQube server called `sonarqube` as in the example above it suffices to run the delete command on that resource:

[source,sh]
----
oc delete sonarqube sonarqube
----

The Operator adds ownerReference fields to all created objects - which means that deleting the sonarqube object also deletes all objects that have been created by the Operator.

== Uninstalling the SonarQube Operator

In case you wish to uninstall the SonarQube Operator make sure that there are no more SonarQube instances running. Once all SonarQube instances have been deleted simply delete the project the operator is running in.

[source,sh]
----
oc delete project sonarqube
----

Then as *cluster-admin* delete the ClusterRole and Custom Resource:

[source,sh]
----
oc delete clusterrole sonarqube-admin-rules
oc delete crd sonarqube.gpte.opentlc.com
----

Commit message:

Converged roles and operator work
Stripped out old GPTE automation and merged in operator roles, removed
relic deployment artifacts

README.adoc, after:

= Sonarqube Operator

== Overview

This repository contains the code to build a Sonarqube Operator for Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform. It will not run on Kubernetes because it uses the `Route` object to provide access to Sonarqube.

The Operator will create a *PostgreSQL* database with persistent storage and a *SonarQube* instance also with persistent storage connected to the PostgreSQL database.

It is implemented on top of the Red Hat https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk[Operator SDK] - in particular the https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/doc/ansible/user-guide.md[Ansible Operator].

== Building the Operator

There is a script `build.sh` which will download the prerequisites (operator-sdk etc) if run with the `-o` option. The script will then build the container image.

Before running the script make sure to update the location of the container image to a repository you have access to. If you decide to build your own also make sure to update deploy/operator.yaml with the updated container image location.

== Installation

=== Common Installation Steps

The installation of the Custom Resource Definition and Cluster Role requires *cluster-admin* privileges. After that regular users with `admin` privileges on their projects (which is automatically granted to the user who creates a project) can provision the SonarQube Operator in their projects and deploy instances of Sonarqube using the sonarqube.gpte.opentlc.com Custom Resource.

Perform the following tasks as *cluster-admin*:

. Deploy the Custom Resource Definition:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jharmison-redhat/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/crds/redhatgov.io_sonarqubes_crd.yaml
----

. Deploy the `sonarqube-admin-rules` Cluster Role (which will be granted automatically to everyone with `admin` privileges):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jharmison-redhat/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/cluster_role.yaml
----

=== Clusterwide Installation

Perform the following tasks as *cluster-admin*:

. Create the Cluster Role for the Operator
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/clusterrole.yaml
----

. Create a project for the operator to run in (different from where the application will be running)
+
[source,sh]
----
oc new-project gpte-operators --display-name="GPTE Operators"
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/service_account.yaml
----

. Grant the *sonarqube-cluster-operator* role to the *sonarqube-operator* service account (if your project is not `gpte-operators` change the project name in the command):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-user sonarqube-cluster-operator system:serviceaccount:gpte-operators:sonarqube-operator
----

. And finally create the SonarQube *Operator*:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/cluster_operator.yaml
----

. Once the Operator pod is running the Operator is ready to start creating SonarQube Servers.

=== Local Installation in a Project

The next steps work either as *cluster-admin* or as a *regular user*.

. Create a new project in which to deploy SonarQube:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc new-project sonarqube --display-name "SonarQube"
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/service_account.yaml
----

. Deploy the *sonarqube-operator* role:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/role.yaml
----

. Grant the *sonarqube-operator* role to the *sonarqube-operator* service account:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/rolebinding.yaml
----

. And finally create the SonarQube *Operator*:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/operator.yaml
----

. Once the Operator pod is running the Operator is ready to start creating SonarQube instances.

== Deploying a SonarQube instance using the Operator

A SonarQube instance is deployed by creating a Custom Resource based on the sonarqube Custom Resource Definition. There is an example of a SonarQube CR at https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wkulhanek/sonarqube-operator/master/deploy/crds/sonarqube_v1alpha1_sonarqube_cr.yaml.

The SonarQube Operator understands the following settings under it's *spec* setting:

* postgresqlVolumeSize: The size of the Persistent Volume to be created for the PostgreSQL database (e.g. 4Gi)
* sonarqubeVolumeSize: The size of the Persistent Volume to be created for SonarQube (e.g. 4Gi)
* sonarqubeSsl: Weather the created route should be a HTTP (false) or HTTPS (true) route.
* sonarqubeServiceName: Optional. The name of the sonarqube service. The default is "sonarqube-metadata.name" where _metadata.name_ is the name of the CR object (in the example below `sonarqube-server`). When specifying this parameter ensure that the service name does not already exist in the project/namespace.
* sonarqubeRoute: Optional. The fully qualified route of the Sonarqube route to be created. This route must be reachable via ingress controllers.

.Example
[source,texinfo]
----
apiVersion: gpte.opentlc.com/v1alpha1
kind: Sonarqube
metadata:
  name: sonarqube
spec:
  postgresqlVolumeSize: 10Gi
  sonarqubeVolumeSize: 10Gi
  sonarqubeSsl: True
  sonarqubeServiceName: mysonarqube
----

. Write the definition to a file (e.g. sonarqube.yaml) and then create the SonarQube instance:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc create -f ./sonarqube.yaml
----

. The operator will first create the PostgreSQL database, wait until it is up and running and then create the SonarQube pod.
. Validate that both pods (postgresql and sonarqube) are running before proceeding.
. You can validate the existence of your SonarQube instance by querying for sonarqube objects:
+
[source,sh]
----
oc get sonarqube
----

. Get the Route for SonarQube (the PostgreSQL database is not accessible outside of the project):
+
[source,sh]
----
oc get route
----

. Use the hostname returned in your Web Browser to open the SonarQube UI (default User ID is `admin` with password `admin`).

== Deleting a SonarQube instance

Deleting a SonarQube instance and its associated resources is as simple as deleting the sonarqube object. If you created a SonarQube server called `sonarqube` as in the example above it suffices to run the delete command on that resource:

[source,sh]
----
oc delete sonarqube sonarqube
----

The Operator adds ownerReference fields to all created objects - which means that deleting the sonarqube object also deletes all objects that have been created by the Operator.

== Uninstalling the SonarQube Operator

In case you wish to uninstall the SonarQube Operator make sure that there are no more SonarQube instances running. Once all SonarQube instances have been deleted simply delete the project the operator is running in.

[source,sh]
----
oc delete project sonarqube
----

Then as *cluster-admin* delete the ClusterRole and Custom Resource:

[source,sh]
----
oc delete clusterrole sonarqube-admin-rules
oc delete crd sonarqube.gpte.opentlc.com
----
